In 1939, Britain entered the Second World War and, after the defeat of its troops in France and the virtual loss of the Battle of the Atlantic, faced the prospect of capitulation. The Nazi successes in the war were largely due to the excellent coordination of troops, thanks to the development of communications and encryption technology. The transmission frequencies were known and any schoolboy with a basic knowledge of physics and the necessary radio parts could intercept messages. The main problem was that all the messages were encrypted and were meaningless sets of symbols to a person who did not know the cipher. At that time, if one could theoretically involve the entire population of the planet, including the elderly and infants, it would take 20,000 years to break the code by brute force.

From 1919, the British GC&CS (Government Code and Cypher School) was responsible for intercepting and decoding secret communications. After the declaration of war, in the GC&CS where employed a large number of talented scientists including Alan Turing, who joined in 1938. Cryptanalyst Joan Clarke also worked there, solving difficult problems with Alan and other scientists. The hardest and most important problem was Enigma, an electromechanical cipher machine, used by the Nazi German army to encode and decode secret messages. Turing was convinced that only an electromechanical machine would be able to decrypt messages, encrypted by Enigma.

Such a machine was the first Bombe was launched on 18 March 1940, later known as the Turing Bombe. It consisted of 108 rotating electromagnetic drums and a number of other auxiliary units. It was about 3.0 m long, 2.1 m high, 0.61 m wide and weighed 2.5 tones. It was mass-produced until September 1944. For each possible key value given by the positions of the rotors, the machine checked against known public text. The known text was: "Heil Hitler", which was concluded each message. Although the Germans were constantly modernising their encryption algorithms, British scientists were still coming up with effective cracking algorithms. Largely due to this Britans were able to avoid the shameful capitulation.

In a 2014, Morten Tyldum directed the period biographical thriller film "The Imitation Game" from a screenplay by Graham Moore, based on the 1983 biography Alan Turing: The Enigma by Andrew Hodges. The film stars Benedict Cumberbatch as Turing and Keira Knightley as Joan Clarke. Unfortunately, the film was presented in the foreign press as the story of a gay man who committed suicide because of his sexuality. They positioned him firstly as a gay icon and secondly as a great mathematician, war hero and father of the first computer.

In any case Alan Turing is a true hero, who showed that you can save many lives without using a gun, just by using your brain.